Add documentation page for accessibility tips (#9608)
decidim/decidim: docs/modules/develop/pages/guide_accessibility.adoc

= Accessibility (a11y)

> Decidim, just like the World Wide Web, is built for everyone regardless of individual abilities or disabilities, and for any software and hardware capable of connecting to the internet. Developing services in an accessible way ensures that the services can reach to audiences as wide as possible which is the most important principle of democracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decidim, just like the World Wide Web, is built for everyone regardless of individual abilities or disabilities, and for any software and hardware capable of connecting to the internet. Developing services in an accessible way ensures that the services can reach audiences as wide as possible which is the most important principle of democracy.
```

Reviewer: Ok, no problem! Let's keep it as is.

These guidelines are constantly evolving and new versions can come out that may require changes in already implemented functionality. Some of the violations can be noticed automatically but others violations require a real person to test the website with the common assistive technologies used for browsing the internet (see the "Testing" section below).

=== Common mistakes

This section contains some common mistakes that developers tend to do regarding accessibility. These do not cover all of the things you need to consider regarding accessibility but we add common issues in this list as we notice them.

==== Illogical heading order

Every page should have a logical heading order when using the `<h1>`, `<h2>`, `<h3>`, `<h4>`, `<h5>` and `<h6>` heading elements. This means that you cannot add e.g. a `<h3>` if the previous heading was `<h1>` before the sub-level heading element appears in the document. `<h1>` should be followed by `<h2>`. Under the `<h2>`, you can add `<h3>`.

> Few other general pieces of advices regarding the headings on the page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Few other general bits of advice regarding the headings on the page:
```

Also note that similar guidelines apply to any elements that dynamically change the page in some way, including accordion elements, dropdown menus, popup elements, etc. Make sure to always indicate the dynamic functionaltiy with the correct ARIA attributes as explained in the section that follows.

For more information, refer to:
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#on-input

==== Utilize ARIA attributes where possible

Many elements that provide interactive functionality on the website require ARIA attributes on them to make them accessible. A couple of example of such cases include:

- An element that shows or hides another element on the page, such as an "accordion" element.
- Dynamic search forms that update another section on the same page without a complete refresh of the page. The button that initiates the search should indicate which element it is connected with on the same page and once the search completes, the number of results found should be announced for the screen readers.
- Pagination elements where you have "next" and "previous" links as well as "current" page which is shown right now.

> - Progress bars which have "minimum" and "maximum" values as well as a "current" value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Progress bars that have "minimum" and "maximum" values as well as a "current" value.
```

- Custom dropdown elements that open a specific section on the page containing the dropdown items and also have currently selected items included in them.

> - Form elements that may have errors on them where the errorneous elements should be indicated for people using assistive technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Form elements that may have errors on them where the faulty elements should be indicated for people using assistive technologies.
```

- Significant areas on the page should be marked with the correct landmark roles, such as navigations and enclosed regions on the page. Many times you can also find the correct HTML element that indicates its correct role by familiarizing yourself with the landmark roles.

To learn more refer to:
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes

==== Elements hidden from the accessibility API

> People using accessible technologies do not always need to "see" (or hear) all of the items that users without any disabilities see on the page. A common example of such element is a visual decorative icon within links or buttons that is only used to make some elements more recognizable for people with no visual impairments. People using assistive technologies may have visual impairments or may use the website completely using a screen reader when these visual cues may just confuse those users rather than provide any actual improvement on their user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People using accessible technologies do not always need to "see" (or hear) all of the items that users without any disabilities see on the page. A common example of such an element is a visual decorative icon within links or buttons that is only used to make some elements more recognizable for those with no visual impairments. Somebody using assistive technologies may have visual impairments or may use the website completely using a screen reader when these visual cues may just confuse those users rather than provide any actual improvement on their user experience.
```

> To hide an element from assistive technologies, use the `aria-hidden="true"` attribute on it. Do not abuse this method to hide almost everything from the website to make it "accessible". The website is not really accessible if everything on it is hidden. Always think whether the element you are hiding provides actually useful functionality for the users. If it does so, you should not hide it. But if the element is only used to provide small decorative enhancements on the user experience, it can be sometimes hidden, such as the example case with the icons within buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To hide an element from assistive technologies, use the `aria-hidden="true"` attribute on it. Do not abuse this method to hide almost everything from the website to make it "accessible". The website is not truly accessible if everything on it is hidden. Always think about whether the element you are hiding provides useful functionality for the users. If it does so, you should not hide it. But if the element is only used to provide small decorative enhancements to the user experience, it can be sometimes hidden, such as in the example case with the icons within buttons.
```

=== Technical accessibility

The Decidim development environment ships with an automated accessibility evaluation tool (with the `decidim-dev` module) that you may have seen at the top left corner of the page in case you have been developing Decidim recently. When the page passes the technical evaluation, you should see the following indicator at the top left corner of the page:

image::wcag-badge-success.png[WCAG success badge]

In case your page has some technical accessibility violations, you should see the following indicator where the number indicates the different violation categories for the page that you are looking at:

image::wcag-badge-error.png[WCAG error badge]

You can see the different inaccessible elements indicated by this tool by clicking the indicator when a side panel is opened displaying the different violation categories and the different elements that have violations in these categories. The inaccessible elements should be highlighted on the page when the side panel is open and you can jump into these elements by clicking the links in the side panel indicating the inaccessible element selectors.

> The automated accessibility auditing tools only cover about 50% of the total accessibility requirements. Although a good starting point, the functionality always needs to be tested these with the real tools and compared to working examples. See the "Testing" section below for more information on how to test your service or the elements you are building with different accessibility tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The automated accessibility auditing tools only cover about 50% of the total accessibility requirements. Although a good starting point, the functionality always needs to be tested with real tools and compared to working examples. See the "Testing" section below for more information on how to test your service or the elements you are building with different accessibility tools.
```

=== Valid HTML

> Always ensure the web pages have valid HTML. You can test this by copying at the source of the page and pasting it into the https://validator.w3.org/#validate_by_input[HTML validator tool].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always ensure the web pages have valid HTML. You can test this by copying the source of the page and pasting it into the https://validator.w3.org/#validate_by_input[HTML validator tool].
```

> Some general guidelines for making the page content valid HTML:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some general guidelines for making the page valid HTML:
```

- The page should always have only one `<main>` element and one only. Avoid using this element in the partials and sub-views if the layout already wraps the page contents into this element.
- Use the `<section>` element with caution but when you decide to use it, ensure it has an identifying heading element (h2-h6).

> - Use the `<article>` element with caution but when you decide to use it, ensure that you are semantically defining an article level content. For example, a proposal **card** or a blog article **teaser** are not semantically articles that define "A complete, or self-contained, composition in a document, page, application, or site and that is, in principle, independently distributable or reusable, e.g. in syndication." If you are using an `<article>` tag, ensure you are describing the full content of the article and also defining the heading element inside the article (see same issue for `<section>` element).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the `<article>` element with caution but when you decide to use it, ensure that you are semantically defining an article-level content. For example, a proposal **card** or a blog article **teaser** are not semantically articles that define https://www.w3.org/TR/2011/WD-html5-author-20110809/the-article-element.html["A complete, or self-contained, composition in a document, page, application, or site and that is, in principle, independently distributable or reusable, e.g. in syndication"]. If you are using an `<article>` tag, ensure you are describing the full content of the article and also defining the heading element inside the article (see the same issue for the `<section>` element).
```

- When defining an ID attribute for the elements, ensure the values of those attributes are unique on the page. E.g. when a filtering form is doubled for desktop and mobile, the doubled filtering control inside that form needs to have a unique ID in both of its parent elements. So if you are e.g. repeating the same partial multiple times on the page, make sure any ID attributes it contains are always unique in each instance of the generated HTML.

=== Accessibility tests

Once you are done developing some page or fixing its accessibility issues, you should add the following shared examples for the system specs of that page:

[source,ruby]
----
it_behaves_like "accessible page"
----

> This checks if the page passes the technical accessibility evaluation and contains valid HTML. It will also ensure that when other people are implementing changes on the pages covered by these tests, they will likely stay accessible also after the changes. Otherwise accessibility can be easily broken as these kinds of issues can be hard to notice for code reviewers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This checks if the page passes the technical accessibility evaluation and contains valid HTML. It will also ensure that when other people are implementing changes on the pages covered by these tests, they will likely stay accessible also after the changes. Otherwise, accessibility can be easily broken as these kinds of issues can be hard to notice for code reviewers.
```

=== Avoid browser's built-in functionality

> Always avoid relying on the browser's built-in functionality *everywhere* for special use cases, as they are known to have problems with the accessibility tools. Some examples on inaccessible elements built into the browsers include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always avoid relying on the browser's built-in functionality *everywhere* for special use cases, as they are known to have problems with the accessibility tools. Some examples of inaccessible elements built into the browsers include:
```

- Built-in alert/confirm dialogs, these are not supported e.g. by all screen readers

> - Default file input elements, these are not translated according to the currently selected language on the page but instead the language of the browser or the operating system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Default file input elements are not translated according to the currently selected language on the page but instead the language of the browser or the operating system
```

- `<details>` and `<summary>` for "toggles" or "dropdowns" because these have problems with some screen readers and these issues can be hard to fix with such special elements
- Any HTML element that has not been widely adopted (such as the mentioned `<details>` and `<summary>`), as accessibility tools are always behind the fast pace of browser development

== How to build accessible elements?

Regardless of the technology being used, a good general advice is to follow the guidelines for accessible elements by searching from the internet with "accessible X element" where you replace the "X" with what you are implementing.

Some examples of accessible elements you can find through internet searches:

- https://kittygiraudel.com/2020/12/10/accessible-icon-links/[Accessible icon links]
- https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/example-index/dialog-modal/dialog[Accessible modal dialog]
- https://a11y-guidelines.orange.com/en/web/components-examples/dropdown-menu/[Accessible dropdown]
- https://multiselect.vue-a11y.com/[Accessible multiselect]
- https://alphagov.github.io/accessible-autocomplete/examples/[Accessible autocomplete]

== Testing

> Different accessibility auditors can also have varying levels of expertise, some may notice even the smallest details in your application and some may be happy as long as you fulfil the minimum requirements. Always do your best regarding accessibility which includes ensuring the website fulfils the necessary technical requirements and testing the service as a whole or the elements that you are building with the actual tools used by people with disabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different accessibility auditors can also have varying levels of expertise, some may notice even the smallest details in your application and some may be happy as long as you fulfill the minimum requirements. Always do your best regarding accessibility which includes ensuring the website meets the necessary technical requirements and testing the service as a whole or the elements that you are building with the actual tools used by people with disabilities.
```

=== Screen readers

Screen readers are mostly used by people with visual disabilities. To test the service with a screen reader, try using it with your eyes closed or blindfolded. Common software used for screen reading includes:

- Windows: NVDA, JAWS
- Apple (macOS, iOS): VoiceOver
- Linux: ORCA
- Android: TalkBack

=== Voice control

> Some people may need to use their devices using speech in case they have physical disabilities that make it hard for them to use the common pointing devices, such as touch screen or mouse. To test the service with voice control, try using it without a keyboard, mouse or touch screen, just by using your mouth to speak. Common software used for voice control includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some people may need to use their devices using speech in case they have physical disabilities that make it hard for them to use the common pointing devices, such as a touch screen or a mouse. To test the service with voice control, try using it without a keyboard, mouse or touch screen, just by using your mouth to speak. Common software used for voice control includes:
```

> Some people may need to use their devices using speech in case they have physical disabilities that make it hard for them to use the common pointing devices, such as a touch screen or a mouse. To test the service with voice control, try using it without a keyboard, mouse or touch screen, just by using your mouth to speak. Common software used for voice control includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some people may need to use their devices using speech in case they have physical disabilities that make it hard for them to use the common pointing devices, such as a touch screen or a mouse. To test the service with voice control, try using it without a keyboard, mouse, or touch screen, just by using your mouth to speak. Common software used for voice control includes:
```

- Windows: Speech Recognition (built-in some Windows versions, limited language support)
- Apple (macOS, iOS): Voice Control
- Chrome browser: Speech Recognition Anywhere

> - Linux: varies, just use browser extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Linux: Varies, just use browser extensions
```
